---
date: 2021-08-01
title: first lactate threshold
categories: sante
---

source: https://www.mdpi.com/2411-5142/5/3/66/pdf
doi:10.3390/jfmk5030066

> A suitable physiological marker for high-volume continuous loads is the first increase in blood lactate concentration (LTP1) in an incremental cycle ergometer test originally prescribed as “anaerobic threshold” [18]. Later on, a threephase energy supply according to the shuttle theory of Brooks [19], has been prescribed including a
second threshold of lactate (LTP2) or ventilation (VT2) [16,17]. Figure 1 shows the time course of blood
lactate concentration [20,21] and both thresholds (LTP1, LTP2) dividing three distinct phases of energy
supply which have been validated recently [22]

> Due to the long duration of occupational work, usually eight hours or even longer, the low intensity range is most relevant. To sustain long-term work low cardio-respiratory and metabolic strain are essential conditions to avoid acute and chronic overload. Intensities below LTP1 represent a balance of lactate production and oxidation with low cardio-respiratory strain. Exceeding LTP1, leads to a significant increase in most if not all physiological variables indicating a stress reaction clearly limiting duration [23]. Below LTP1 there is just a withdrawal of the parasympathetic influence J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 66 3 of 13 reaching its minimum at the LTP1 [24]. Above LTP1, sympathetic drive increases, indicated by a rise in catecholamines and related variables [17,22]. Moser et al. [22], nicely showed that catecholamine levels did not increase above baseline values if workload was below LTP1 during constant load cycling and just slightly increased with high intensity intervals if the mean load was below LTP1. It is therefore obvious that exceeding LTP1 clearly reduces time to fatigue [23]. 

> Working at intensities below LTP1, prolongs performance time substantially which has been shown in ultra-distance athletes cycling 24 h at a workload clearly below LTP1 [26]