---
title: What We Know About Leadership (Hogan, Kaiser -Review of General Psychology)
date: 2021-07-09
categories: leadership
---

> First, leadership solves the problem of how to organize collective effort; consequently, it is the key to organizational effectiveness

> Second, and more important from a moral perspective, bad leaders perpetrate terrible mis- ery on those subject to their domain

> This article tries to make three points. The first is that leadership matters; it is hugely con- sequential for the success of organizations and the well-being of employees and citizens. Sec- ond, when conceptualized in the context of hu- man origins, it becomes clear that leadership is an adaptive tool for individual and group sur- vival. We believe that, in essence, leadership primarily concerns building and maintaining ef- fective teams: persuading people to give up, for a while, their selfish pursuits and pursue a com- mon goal. Our final point is that the personality of a leader affects the performance of a team: Who we are determines how we lead

On the other hand, a review of sociology, anthropology, and evolutionary psychology suggests an alternative generalization that, in fact, is two related generalizations. First, people always live in groups; we evolved as group- living animals. Second, every group has a status hierarchy; there are people at the bottom, in the middle, and at the top, and everyone knows who is where. This suggests that the most important problems in life concern getting along with other people and achieving some measure of status. We refer to these concerns as “getting along” and “getting ahead,” and individual dif- ferences in these capabilities predict a wide range of occupational outcomes (see J. Hogan & Holland, 2003). It is also worth noting that effective leaders are skilled at building relation- ships and acquiring status

> Most studies define leadership in terms of emergence—the person in a group of strangers who exerts the most influence—or in terms of ratings of an individual “leader” by more senior “leaders.” Although very few stud- ies have used indices of group performance as the criterion for leadership,1 we believe this is the most appropriate way to define and evaluate leadership. With this definition in mind, we turn to a discussion of what we know about leadership.

> the literature on implicit leadership theories suggests the characteristics people look for in their leaders; this research also tells us which of the positive attributes listed by C. Peterson and Seligman (2004) define effective leaders in the eyes of the led. In order of importance, the four themes that appear regularly in this literature—the leader- ship virtues are: 
* integrity
* decisiveness,
* competence, and 
* vision 
(e.g., Kouzes & Posner, 2002; Lord, Foti, & DeVader, 1984).

> Good to Great
Most business books are empirical nonsense, but Collins’s (2001a) book, Good to Great, seems to be an exception. He and his staff searched databases for the Fortune 1000 com- panies to identify companies that had 15 years of performance below the average of their busi- ness sector and then 15 years of sustained per- formance significantly above the average of their sector. They found 11 companies that fit this profile. The next question was, what distin- guished these 11 companies? Their somewhat reluctant conclusion was that the distinguishing feature was a new CEO who took charge of the organization and then improved its performance.
These 11 CEOs all shared the same two char- acteristics (above and beyond the four elements described earlier; Collins, 2001b). First, they were modest and humble, as opposed to self- dramatizing and self-promoting. Second, they were phenomenally, almost preternaturally, per- sistent. These findings were a jolt to the busi- ness literature (which had been promoting the cult of the charismatic CEO),

> After reviewing this literature, Hogan and Hogan (1997) proposed that the standard per- sonality disorders, as described in the Diagnos- tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 4th edition (DSM–IV; American Psychiatric As- sociation, 1994), provide a taxonomy of the most important causes of managerial failure. Personality disorders are not forms of mental illness; they are dysfunctional interpersonal dis- positions that (a) coexist with talent, ambition, and good social skills and (b) prevent people from completing the essential task of leader- ship: building a team. These dysfunctional dis- positions are what we described earlier as the dark side of personality. Hogan and Hogan de- veloped an inventory of the 11 key dimensions of the dark side using the DSM–IV Axis II personality disorders as a guide. The inventory is intended to predict managerial failure, and subsequent research shows that it does (Hogan & Hogan, 2001). This taxonomy is presented in Table 2.
There are three points to note about these dark side characteristics. First, they are hard to detect, for two reasons. On the one hand, they coexist with well-developed social skills (Hogan & Hogan, 1997, 2001). On the other hand, these tendencies, although flawed, are in- tended to make a positive impression on others, and they do in the short run. For example, people with high scores on the Bold scale (nar- cissism) initially seem confident and charis- matic. Over time, however, these features turn into a sense of entitlement and an inability to learn from mistakes. Paulhus (1998) reported that, in an unstructured group task in which the participants are strangers, narcissism predicts making a strong initial impression and being nominated as a leader but subsequently being rejected by the group as a result of arrogance and high-handedness. Indeed, Baumeister and
Scher (1988) reported that the distinguishing feature of most forms of self-defeating behavior is the pursuit of short-term gains that carry significant long-term costs (see Table 2 for other examples of this dynamic).
Second, although high scores on the 11 dark side dimensions shown in Table 2 are associated with negative consequences in the long run, low scores are not necessarily desirable either; this is what makes personality psychology so inter- esting. Low levels of dutifulness suggest prob- lems with authority; low levels of imaginative- ness suggest lack of vision; low levels of bold- ness suggest indecisiveness; and so on. Optimum performance is associated with more moderate scores. Kaplan and Kaiser have ap- plied this reasoning to executive assessment; their data clearly show that there is an optimal level for most managerial behaviors (e.g., Kaplan & Kaiser, 2003).
The third point concerns how executive se- lection decisions are made (Sessa, Kaiser, Tay- lor, & Campbell, 1998). Most formal selection tools are rarely used. Former subordinates— those who are best able to report on a person’s talent for leadership—are almost never con- sulted. Often new executives are recruited from outside the organization, making it even more difficult to evaluate the candidate appropriately. The most common selection tool is an inter- view, and the dark side tendencies are designed to create favorable immediate impressions; nar- cissists and psychopaths excel during inter- views. We speculate that many executives are hired for the very characteristics that ultimately lead them to fail.