---
date: 2021-08-01
title: Lactate threshold training
categories: sante
---

# Lactate threshold training

[https://www.unm.edu/~lkravitz/Article%20folder/lactatethreshold.html](https://www.unm.edu/~lkravitz/Article%20folder/lactatethreshold.html)

## What is the Anaerobic Threshold?

> The term anaerobic threshold was introduced in the 1960’s based on the concept that at high-intensity levels of exercise, low levels of oxygen (or hypoxia) exist in the muscles (Roberts & Robergs 1997). At this point, for exercise to continue, energy supply needed to shift from the aerobic energy system (mitochondrial respiration) to anaerobic energy systems (glycolysis and the phosphagen system).

> However, there are many researchers who strongly object to the use of the term anaerobic threshold, believing it is misleading. The main argument against using the term anaerobic threshold is that it suggests oxygen supply to muscles is limited at specific exercise intensities. However, there is no evidence that indicates muscles become deprived of oxygen, even at maximal exercise intensities (Brooks 1985). The second main argument against using anaerobic threshold is that it suggests at this point in exercise intensity, metabolism shifts completely from aerobic to anaerobic energy systems. This interpretation is an overly simplistic view of the regulation of energy metabolism, as anaerobic energy systems (glycolysis and the phosphagen system) do not take over the task of ATP regeneration completely at higher intensities of exercise, but rather augment the energy supply provided from mitochondrial respiration (Robergs, Ghiasvand, Parker, 2004).  

## Lactate Threshold Training Programs and Workouts

> Although the optimal training for lactate threshold improvement has yet to be fully identified by researchers, there are still some excellent guidelines you can follow in generating training programs and workouts in order to optimize the endurance performance of clientele. Research has indicated that training programs that are a combination of high volume, maximal steady-state, and interval workouts have the most pronounced effect on lactate threshold improvement (Roberts & Robergs 1997, Weltman 1995).

High Volume Training
Initially, the best way to improve the lactate threshold levels of your clients is to increase their training volume, regardless of the cardiovascular mode of exercise. Let’s create a case study as we discuss lactate threshold training to fully see how to design an effective program. For our case study, let’s assume the client is presently doing 100 minutes of cardiovascular exercise a week, with the goal of increasing the total time to 200 minutes per week. Increased training volume should be gradual and in the order of approximately 10-20% per week (Bompa 1999). For our case study, if the client progressed at 20% per week, it would take approximately four weeks to safely progress to the target weekly volume of 200 minutes per week. The Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) scale should be used to prescribe cardiorespiratory exercise intensity during this period. For this high volume training, your client should train at an RPE of 11-12, which subjectively is a light exercise intensity level. Mix up the total time per session of cardiovascular exercise throughout the week, however it works best for the client. However, the minimum bout of cardiovascular exercise should be 10 minutes in duration. The major benefit of increased training volume is an increased capacity for mitochondrial respiration, which is imperative to improvements in lactate threshold.

Maximal Steady-State Training
Steady-state training at the lactate threshold is often referred to as “maximal steady-state” exercise or “tempo runs.” Research has shown that the lactate threshold occurs at 80-90% of heart rate reserve (HRR) in trained individuals and at 50-60% HRR in untrained individuals (Weltman 1995). Without access to an exercise physiology laboratory to get actual lactate threshold measurements for your clients, the RPE scale will be the most accurate way to determine training intensity for maximal steady-state exercise sessions. Research has shown that RPE is strongly related to the blood lactate response to exercise regardless of gender, training status, type of exercise being performed, or the intensity of training (Weltman 1995). Findings from studies have indicated that the lactate threshold occurs between 13 and 15 on the RPE scale, which corresponds to feelings of ‘somewhat hard’ and ‘hard’ (Weltman 1995).

Following the build-up in training volume described above, your client may begin maximal steady-state exercise sessions. Collectively, these sessions should consist of no more than 10% of the total weekly volume (Foran 2001). In our case study, 10% of 200 minutes is 20 minutes, which is the upper limit of total time accumulated during maximal steady-state exercise sessions in one week. While this approach may appear conservative, it will help to prevent over training and injuries and is a wonderful starting place.

Interval Training Above the Lactate Threshold
Interval training workouts are high-intensity training sessions performed for short durations of time at velocities or workloads above the lactate threshold. Although you can design the interval workout however you wish, for our case study let’s choose to alternate a 4-minute, high-intensity bout with a 4-minute, low-intensity aerobic recovery bout. During the high-intensity bouts above the lactate threshold, have the client exercise above a 15 RPE (subjectively training at a HARD or VERY HARD intensity), but below an all-out effort (19 or 20 RPE). Encourage the client to workout at a very light intensity (less than 12 RPE) during the recovery bout. Similar to maximal steady-state sessions, the total interval training workout time should not exceed 10% of weekly training volume. With our case study, 10% of 200 would be 20 minutes of interval training sessions per week. Important training prescription recommendation! Avoid scheduling the interval training workouts and maximal steady-state exercise sessions in back-to-back workouts. 